---
title: "Let's Talk"
date: "2021-10-12"
---

We all want to work in teams where people speak up about the serious problems,
mistakes and misunderstandings, but somehow it rarely happens. Did you notice,
how you as well avoid the necessary conflicts?

In this article we will speak about:
 * What are we so frickin afraid of?
 * What is happening inside of us when we receive different kinds of feedback?
 * What can we do to gain more courage to speak up?
 * How can we turn our fears into fruitful discussions?
 * What are small steps we can take right now?


## What are we so frickin afraid of?

What can happen when you speak up? The other person might not listen to you,
leaving you stranded. Or you might make them angry. Or your relationship might
deteriorate if they cannot accept your feedback. If they have some influence
over you, you might even end up losing your job or marriage. And on top of that
you might find later on that you were wrong.

So there are a lot of things that can go wrong and it is even possible to have
long term negvative effects from speaking up. There is no denying it.

But there are also negative effects of not speaking up: You might lose
your passion, you might end up producing worse results than you could have,
you might lose customers, work on the wrong project altogether, hurt each
other, put yourself or others in depression and burn-out, deteriorate your
health.

Wouldn't it be great if we could avoid both outcomes somehow? Well, here's the
good part:

**You can!**

Yes, you've read that correctly. It is possible. And if you think about it, you
also know people who can have tough conversations but are still loved and
respected by their peers. There is also no magic sauce. It can be learned.
And you can see results even if you only take small steps!

What you need to get there is an understanding of how different kind of
feedback works on us humans - yes, including you - as well as a few tools and
skills. Let's talk!

## Our reaction to negative feedback

You probably remember the last time a parent, teacher or boss gave you negative
feedback about some work you've done. How did that make you feel?

Even if you expected that feedback, it probably hit you somewhat by surprise,
right? You might have become tense already in anticipation. After hearing it,
your face and hands might have become very cold or hot. Maybe you even started
sweating. Your arms and legs might have started shaking.

And even in your mind you were not your normal self. Thoughts were racing
through it, thoughts about why it was not your fault or actually someone
else's. Or your mind was completely blank and empty, making you struggle to
even find the right words.

The response you gave probably was angry and hurtful, or needy and full of
excuses, or maybe even complete silence. In either case, it probably was not
your true self speaking.

And after thinking about it for some time, you might have found that there was
actually some truth in the feedback and you start wishing that you reacted
differently, thinking about all kinds of ways how you would want to respond
differently next time.

Do not worry! It is not your fault! All humans react like that to negative
feedback. We lose our true personality and go into a so called fight-or-flight
mode. In that mode the only thing that matters to us how to avoid the perceived
danger. The relationships involved, the truthfulness of the situation or
long-term impact are completely ignored.

This is just being a normal human. But if others react the same way, then this
might not be the right path towards the open conversation we desire, right?

Let's have a look what other options exist!

## Our reaction to positive feedback

Of course, if we can give negative feedback, we can also give positive
feedback, e.g, through praise and fluttering.

How did you feel the last time someone praised you?

It might have made you smile and blush. You might have felt confident and
fulfilled. It might have made you like the other person more.

This sounds a lot more positive, right? However, did it also make you feel
energized to change? Probably not so much. And change is actually what we aim
for when we have a serious conversation, right?

Okay, so we are not yet at the right kind of feedback. But we can already see,
why we and others often choose to not have these conversations. With negative
feedback we encourage a fight-or-flight self defense reaction that even might
end up hurting us. With positive feedback we might even get liked more by the
other person, even though we don't encourage any change. 

We have to look further. There should be some kind of feedback that doesn't
create a fight-or-flight reaction and encourages change!

## Our reaction to encouraging feedback

It might be much harder to remember, but you likely also received encouraging
feedback at some point in your life. You started off at point `X`, then
discussed the topic with someone, maybe a parent or a teacher or a friend, and
ended up at a place where you felt you had an action plan, motivation to get
started and felt certain that you could end up at `X+1` or better.

How did it make you feel?

You might have had an out-of-your-body experience, where the topic, the
whiteboard or the software you were working in where your main focus. You may
have felt excitement and creativity flowing through your system. It might have
felt like a ping pong of ideas between you and the other person, hierarchies
and politeness vanishing, everybody knowing that this discussion was about
growth and ideas.

That looks like the kind of discussion we want to have with other people,
right?

But how did we get there? I've mentioned earlier that you might have had this
kind of experience with a parent, teacher or friend. That was on purpose.
Because likely you had this experience with someone you trusted. And probably
it was when you asked them for help with something where you wanted to change
yourself. For instance, you might have wanted to understand a complex topic in
your biology classes, you might have wanted to start a new hobby and were not
sure what you are good at, or you did not understand why the other person
reacted in a certain way and were curious about learning their view from them.

And there it is: Helping each other is the way to keep the discussion
constructive and serious and if it works out the end result is that at least
one person goes out of the conversation with the courage to change something.

## But what if the other person is not asking for help?

We might patiently wait for months for the other person to ask for help and
yet, nothing happens. So it might occur to us that we should go to them and
offer our advise. You might already guess that this might not end as well
either.

What happens if someone else comes to you and offers you help, out of the blue?

You might be surprised, as you were currently thinking about other topics. You
might feel unprepared to talk about the problem. Them mentioning your problem
might make you look weak. It also might feel like criticism to see yourself as
the source of the problem or its not-yet-implemented solution. They also might
see the problem from a different angle that you would not agree with, or might
see an entire different problem altogether than the one you might seek help
with. You might react with fight-or-flight, similarly to negative feedback, you
might want to reestablish a relationship where you are not "below" the person
offering the help, and you might see the advise more as condescending rather
than supportive.

So, offering help might not lead us into this trusting, energizing conversation
we are looking for.

## Asking for Help

It seems illogical at first. At least I had to struggle with this idea for a
long time before it made sense to me. But I hope through sharing some of my
conclusions maybe it can also make sens to you: Asking for help is the way to
speak up.

How does it feel when asked for help?

You might feel honored to be seen as so skilled and experienced that your
advise is requested. You might feel the trust given to you by the asker. As you
are not the problem nor its source you think about solutions creatively and
free of self-doubt. Besides a solution to the problem you also feel the desire
to motivate, emotionally support, and understand the other person. To make it
short, you feel encouraged and creative.

And that is what we wanted from the beginning for the other person, right? This
way we can approach the problem together!

# How to Ask For Help

Now we understand that helping each other is "The Way" to speak up without
enticing fight-or-flight reactions in our peers, and we understand that asking
for help is the way to start the discussion. But one point is still not clear.

How do we get from our understanding of the problem, e.g., "Subash is always
interrupting our Daily Standups with Star Wars jokes and side discussions about
the latest tv shows and computer games", to a request for help to Subash?

Isn't it him who needs the help to just shut up and be more professional?

Well, we obviously need to change our perspective of the situation to find
something that we can ask for help with here.

As a first step it might make sense to think about what problems we personally
experience in this situation. Continuing with our example with Subash, we might
find it hard to focus on the meeting topics due to the background noise. We
might also feel ashamed that we sometimes really laugh about his jokes. I mean,
he is funny, right? And sometimes the meeting might feel so stretched and
unrelated to our work that we seriously get bored ourselves and then we miss
something important because we started to listen to Subash's stories. What
other problems might we face personally here? Think about it. It's quite
interesting what one can come up with and has experienced in similar
situations.

So there are lot of topics where we can ask for help. And we also want to solve
the problem together with Subash, so as a second step it might make sense to
think about what goals we have for our relationship to grow from this. For
instance, we want to learn to know each other better, we want to build more
trust and care for each other, we want him to succeed in his career and we want
him to support us in our career as well. Again, what other goals could we have
in common?

Now that we are prepared for a discussion with a request for help and the
positive intention to build and grow our relationship we can approach him. It
is not the last step though.

During our conversation, especially in the beginning when we are not in a
creative flow yet with each other, it is important to show empathy. That means
we need to increase the bond, or connection, between us pro-actively by showing
that we listen to the other person's understanding of the world, we need to be
curious to understand that world view and the advise we have asked for, and
even if it feels weird, we have to start using their words. We might develop
with Vim but they might prefer Emacs. If they embrace Emacs and its superiority
we must be sure to not start a fight with them. We want to avoid
fight-or-flight reactions, and a critical ingredient for that is to not start
with our own fight-or-flight reactions. I can tell you here that I am still
having a hard time with this point myself. Putting in effort to show
curiousity, empathy and acceptance of the other person feels weird if you are
not used to it. But I can also ensure you that the benefits are huge even with
small tokens of empathy you can give the other person here and there.

Finally, the fourth step is to show confidence in the other person's ability.
For the other person to actually implement whatever changes you decide together
to implement, they need to feel confident in their ability to actually do it.
And the best support you can give them is by showing your own confidence. For
instance, in the discussion with Subash you might get to the conclusion that
the meetings really tend to turn boring, and that he has a talent for spotting
these situations when people drift off. And instead of being silent, you two
decide that he can use that talent and refocus othe discussion or encourage
people to move on to the next topic when he spots that. You can show your
confidence in his ability by acknowledging his talent in spotting these
situations and his ability to get people to listen to him who otherwise where
just shutting down on the inside.

## Summary

In this article we've discussed how to speak up about uncomfortable but
important topics. We learned that we are generally hesitant to speak up due to
the backlash that negative feedback can generate and tend to focus on the
positive feedback that improves our relationship but avoids the pain points. We
have also learned a way to give encouraging feedback by asking for help. To
succeed with asking for help we need to figure out which points we actually
need help with, we need to remind ourselves about the positive outcome we want
to achieve for our relationship with the other person, we need to show empathy
during the conversation, and we can encourage the other person to take action
by showing our confidence in their abilities.

How will you use that knowledge to speak up more often and more constructively
in the future?
